Juan Angueyra, M.D., Ph.D
Research fellow
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (20892)
April ??, 2016

Amy F. Savage, Ph.D.
Director, Citizen Science Program
Visiting Assistant Professor of Biology
RKC 202, Bard College

Dear Dr. Savage,
	I was very excited to see the call for Bard College Citizen Science faculty for 2017. As a scientist, I am very passionate about the promotion of science literacy and scientific thinking and its impact on decision-making both at the individual and community level. My main goal for teaching is to create a safe environment that allows students to question and critically evaluate the world around them. To achieve this, I strive to use a “flip the classroom” approach centered on active learning methods, aligning well with the format of the Citizen Science program. It is my hope to create an environment that encourages participation, supports diversity and fosters critical and effective articulation of thinking.
	During my education, first as an M.D. and then as a Ph.D, I had diverse teaching experiences, that have showed me that I have an innate ability to break-down concepts into small and understandable parts, that then can reassembled into a complex system. This ability proved to be extremely useful in small groups during practical sessions. For example, as a teaching assistant and then faculty of the Marine Biological Laboratory’s Neurobiology course in Woods Hole, I taught graduate students and postdoctoral fellows practical and theoretical principles of electrophysiology and single-channel recordings, leading to small and independent research projects. Last year, with the objective of learning best practices in STEM education, I enrolled in “Scientist teaching Science”, a teaching course centered on methods of active learning. I recently had the chance to apply these methods teaching the “Ion channels” module of a graduate-level course on Principles of Cellular Neuroscience. During this module, I successfully integrated the presentation, discussion and analysis of some unpublished data on the mechanism of action of a spider toxin on voltage-gated potassium channels. This approach enabled students to understand how data and concepts are leveraged to build understanding about a specific topic, and helped foster conversations about the process of science and evidence in general, allowing to naturally and quickly reach course objectives that spanned all levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy.
	Given my broad medical and science background, I feel I have the proper expertise for a program focused on infectious disease and its global impact. As an active scientist, I am particularly well-equipped to guide students through the design, concept and execution of laboratory experiments and the subsequent analysis and interpretation of data. More importantly, my approach to teaching and my commitment to active learning and the development of critical-thinking and problem-solving skills fits well in the Citizen Science program. In class, I actively seek to use material from scientists of diverse genders and ethnicity, and in an inclusive and welcoming environment, use the different backgrounds of the students as a leverage point to foster diversity in point of views, approaches and disciplines that can be used to tackle a single problem. My hope is that exposure to diverse techniques, points of views and approaches to science will broaden the student's way of thinking and expand even beyond the classroom. 

Thank you for your time and consideration. 